=== FILE: Chapter5-Clustering.pptx ===
Total slides: 40

--- Slide 1 ---
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING (NLP)
Chapter 5: TEXT CLUSTERING
Trương Quốc Định
Faculty of Information Systems – College of Information & Communication Technology

--- Slide 2 ---
Introduction
Cluster: A collection of data objects similar (or related) to one another within the same group dissimilar (or unrelated) to the objects in other groups.
Cluster analysis
  Finding similarities between data according to the characteristics found in the data and grouping similar data objects into clusters.
Unsupervised learning: no predefined classes.
Typical applications
  As a stand-alone tool to get insight into data distribution.
  As a preprocessing step for other algorithms.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 3 ---
Introduction
Clustering for Data Understanding and Applications
  Information retrieval: document clustering.
  Land use: Identification of areas of similar land use in an earth observation database.
  Marketing: Help marketers discover distinct groups in their customer bases, and then use this knowledge to develop targeted marketing programs.
  Economic Science: market research.
  …
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 4 ---
Introduction
Clustering as a Preprocessing Tool (Utility)
  Summarization: Preprocessing for regression, association analysis, …
  Finding K-nearest Neighbours: Localizing search to one or a small number of clusters.
  Outlier detection: Outliers are often viewed as those “far away” from any cluster.
  …
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 5 ---
Quality: What Is Good Clustering?
A good clustering method will produce high quality clusters
  high intra-class similarity: cohesive within clusters
  low inter-class similarity: distinctive between clusters
The quality of a clustering method depends on
  the similarity measure used by the method,
  its implementation, and
  its ability to discover some or all of the hidden patterns.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 6 ---
Measure the Quality of Clustering
Dissimilarity/Similarity metric
  Similarity is expressed in terms of a distance function, typically metric: d(i, j).
  The definitions of distance functions are usually rather different for interval-scaled, boolean, categorical, ordinal ratio, and vector variables.
  Weights should be associated with different variables based on applications and data semantics.
Quality of clustering
  There is usually a separate “quality” function that measures the “goodness” of a cluster.
  It is hard to define “similar enough” or “good enough”
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 7 ---
Considerations for Cluster Analysis
Partitioning criteria
  Single level vs. hierarchical partitioning (often, multi-level hierarchical partitioning is desirable).
Separation of clusters
  Exclusive (e.g., one customer belongs to only one region) vs. non-exclusive (e.g., one document may belong to more than one class)
Similarity measure
  Distance-based (e.g., Euclidian, road network, vector)  vs. connectivity-based (e.g., density or contiguity)
Clustering space
  Full space (often when low dimensional) vs. subspaces (often in high-dimensional clustering)
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 8 ---
Requirements and Challenges
Scalability
  Clustering all the data instead of only on samples.
Ability to deal with different types of attributes
  Numerical, binary, categorical, ordinal, linked, and mixture of these
Constraint-based clustering
  User may give inputs on constraints
  Use domain knowledge to determine input parameters
Interpretability and usability
Others
  Discovery of clusters with arbitrary shape
  Ability to deal with noisy data
  Incremental clustering and insensitivity to input order
  High dimensionality
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 9 ---
Major Clustering Approaches
Partitioning approach
  Construct various partitions and then evaluate them by some criterion, e.g., minimizing the sum of square errors
  Typical methods: k-means, k-medoids.
Hierarchical approach
  Create a hierarchical decomposition of the set of data (or objects) using some criterion.
  Typical methods: Diana, Agnes, …
Density-based approach
  Based on connectivity and density functions
  Typical methods: DBSCAN, …
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 10 ---
Major Clustering Approaches
Model-based
  A model is hypothesized for each of the clusters and tries to find the best fit of that model to each other.
  Typical methods: SOM, GHSOM …
Frequent pattern-based
  Based on the analysis of frequent patterns
  Typical methods: p-Cluster
Link-based clustering
  Objects are often linked together in various ways
  Massive links can be used to cluster objects: SimRank, LinkClus
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 11 ---
Partitioning Algorithms
Partitioning n objects into a set of k clusters, such that the sum of squared distances is minimized (where ci is the centroid or medoid of cluster Ci)
Given k, find a partition of k clusters that optimizes the chosen partitioning criterion
  Global optimal: exhaustively enumerate all partitions
  Heuristic methods: k-means and k-medoids algorithms
  k-means (MacQueen’67, Lloyd’57/’82): Each cluster is represented by the center of the cluster.
  k-medoids or PAM (Kaufman & Rousseeuw’87): Each cluster is represented by one of the objects in the cluster.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 12 ---
The K-Means Clustering Method
Given k, the k-means algorithm is implemented in four steps
  Partition objects into k nonempty subsets
  Compute seed points as the centroids of the clusters of the current partitioning
  Assign each object to the cluster with the nearest seed point
  Go back to Step 2, stop when the assignment does not change
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 13 ---
Comments on the K-Means Method
Strength
  Efficient: O(tkn), where n is # objects, k is # clusters, and t  is # iterations. Normally, k, t << n.
Weakness
  Need to specify k, the number of clusters, in advance (there are ways to automatically determine the best k (see Hastie et al., 2009).
  Sensitive to noisy data and outliers.
  Not suitable to discover clusters with non-convex shapes.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 14 ---
The K-Medoid Clustering Method
Select k random points out of the n data points as the medoids.
Associate each data point to the closest medoid by using any common distance metric methods.
While the cost decreases
  For each medoid m, for each data o point which is not a medoid
    Swap m and o, associate each data point to the closest medoid, and recompute the cost.
    If the total cost is more than that in the previous step, undo the swap.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 15 ---
Hierarchical Clustering
Use distance matrix as clustering criteria.
This method does not require the number of clusters k as an input.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 16 ---
Hierarchical Clustering
Botom-up (Agglomerative) Clustering
  Form all possible singleton clusters (each containing a single object).
  Greedily combine clusters with “maximum similarity” (or “minimum distance”) together into a new cluster.
  Continue until all objects are contained in a single cluster.
Top-down (Divisive) Clustering
  Start with a cluster containing all objects.
  Greedily split the cluster into two, assigning objects to clusters so as to maximize the within-group similarity.
  Continue splitting clusters which are the least coherent until either having only singleton clusters or reaching the number of desired clusters.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 17 ---
The Bottom-up Hierarchical Clustering Algorithm
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 18 ---
The Top-down Hierarchical Clustering Algorithm
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 19 ---
Distance between Clusters
MIN (Single Link) Proximity
  Cluster proximity is defined as the shortest distance between two points, 𝑥 and 𝑦, that are in different clusters, 𝐴 and 𝐵.
MAX (Complete Link) Proximity
  Defines cluster proximity as the furthest distance between two points, 𝑥 and 𝑦, that are in different clusters, 𝐴 and 𝐵.
Group Average Proximity
  Defines cluster proximity as the average distance between two points, 𝑥 and 𝑦, that are in different clusters, 𝐴 and 𝐵 (number of points in cluster 𝑗 is 𝑛𝑗)
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 20 ---
Density-Based Clustering
Clustering based on density (local cluster criterion), such as density-connected points.
Major features
  Discover clusters of arbitrary shape,
  Handle noise,
  One scan,
  Need density parameters as termination condition.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 21 ---
Density-Based Clustering
Two parameters
  Eps: Maximum radius of the neighbourhood.
  MinPts: Minimum number of points in an Eps-neighbourhood of that point.
NEps(p): {q belongs to D | dist(p,q) ≤ Eps}
Directly density-reachable: A point p is directly density-reachable from a point q w.r.t. Eps, MinPts if
  p belongs to NEps(q)
  |NEps (q)| ≥ MinPts
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 22 ---
Density-Based Clustering
Density-reachable
  A point p is density-reachable from a point q w.r.t. Eps, MinPts if there is a chain of points p1, …, pn, p1 = q, pn = p such that pi+1 is directly density-reachable from pi.
Density-connected
  A point p is density-connected to a point q w.r.t. Eps, MinPts if there is a point o such that both, p and q are density-reachable from o w.r.t. Eps and MinPts.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 23 ---
DBSCAN: Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise
A cluster is defined as a maximal set of density-connected points.
Algorithm
  Arbitrary select a point p.
  Retrieve all points density-reachable from p w.r.t. Eps and MinPts.
  If p is a core point, a cluster is formed.
  If p is a border point, no points are density-reachable from p and DBSCAN visits the next point of the database
  Continue the process until all of the points have been processed.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 24 ---
DBSCAN: Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 25 ---
Self organizing map approach
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 26 ---
SOM - Self Organizing Map
Description
  SOM can map all these high-dimension data onto 2 dimensions space.
  SOM are not very sensitive to some noisy data and the clustering quality can also be assured.
Architecture
  Each neuron (node) corresponds a set of samples from the dataset.
  Each neuron is associated a vector of weights (codebook).
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 27 ---
SOM - Self Organizing Map
Map topology
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 28 ---
SOM - Self Organizing Map
Input: dataset, size and topology of the map
Output: the codebook for each output node.
Method
  1. Randomize the map’s nodes weight
  2. Select randomly one instance
  3. Find the closest node: best matching unit
  4. The codebook of this node is updated
  5. The codebooks of the adjacent (neighbour) nodes are also updated, by not to the same degree
  6. Reduce the intensity of the update progressively
  7. Repeat 2 to 6 for Tmax iterations
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 29 ---
SOM - Self Organizing Map
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 30 ---
SOM - Self Organizing Map
Advantages
  It is very simple.
  It classify data well and then are easily evaluate for their own quality so you can actually calculated how good a map is and how strong the similarities between objects are.
Disadvantages
  SOMs organize sample data so that in the final product, the samples are usually surrounded by similar samples, however similar samples are not always near each other.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 31 ---
GHSOM - The Growing Hierarchical SOM
Description
  The key idea of GH-SOM is to use a hierarchical structure of multiple layers where each layer consists of a number of independent self-organizing maps (SOMs).
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 32 ---
GHSOM - The Growing Hierarchical SOM
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 33 ---
Cluster labelling
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 34 ---
Joint entropy
The joint entropy of two discrete random variables X and Y with a joint distribution p(x, y) is:
The conditional entropy H(Y|X) quantifies the uncertainty of Y that remains if the outcome of X is given.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 35 ---
Joint entropy
The chain rule for entropy is analogous to the chain rule for probability and, in fact, derives directly from it.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 36 ---
Mutual information
The MI describes the amount of information about one random variable obtained through the other one or how different the joint distribution is from pure independence.
The MI I(X; Y) is the Kullback-Leibler Divergence between the joint distribution and the product distribution p(x)p(y)
We can rewrite the definition of mutual information I(X; Y) as
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 37 ---
Chi-square test
A formal statistical test to determine whether results are statistically significant.
Example
  Hypothetical outbreak of Salmonella on a cruise ship.
  All 300 people on cruise ship interviewed, 60 had symptoms consistent with Salmonella.
  Questionnaires indicate many of the case-patients ate tomatoes from the salad bar.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 38 ---
Chi-square test
To conduct a chi-square the following conditions must be met
  There must be at least a total of 30 observations (people) in the table.
  Each cell must contain a count of 5 or more.
To conduct a chi-square test we compare the observed data (from study results) with the data we would expect to see.
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 39 ---
Chi-square test
TEXT CLUSTERING

--- Slide 40 ---
Chi-square test
Chi-square is [(Observed – Expected)2/Expected] for each cell of the table.
What does the chi-square tell you?
  In general, the higher the chi-square value, the greater the likelihood there is a statistically significant difference between the two groups you are comparing.
TEXT CLUSTERING
