=== FILE: Chapter3-InformationRetrieval.pptx ===
Total slides: 49

--- Slide 1 ---
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING (NLP)
Chapter 3: INFORMATION RETRIEVAL
Trương Quốc Định
Faculty of Information Systems – College of Information & Communication Technology

--- Slide 2 ---
Definition
Information Retrieval (IR) is finding material (usually documents) of an unstructured nature (usually text) that satisfies an information need from within large collections (usually stored on computers).
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 3 ---
Basic assumptions of Information Retrieval
Collection: Fixed set of documents
Goal: Retrieve documents with information that is relevant to the user’s information need and helps the user complete a task
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 4 ---
The classic search model
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 5 ---
Inverted index
For each term t, we must store a list of all documents that contain t.
  Identify each by a docID, a document serial number.
Can we used fixed-size arrays for this?
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 6 ---
Inverted index
We need variable-size postings lists
  On disk, a continuous run of postings is normal and best.
  In memory, can use linked lists or variable length arrays.
    Some trade offs in size/ease of insertion
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL
Posting
Brutus
Calpurnia
Caesar
2
31
174
54
101

--- Slide 7 ---
Query processing: AND
Consider processing the query: Brutus AND Caesar
  Locate Brutus in the Dictionary;
    Retrieve its postings.
  Locate Caesar in the Dictionary;
    Retrieve its postings.
  “Merge” the two postings.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 8 ---
The merge
Walk through the two postings simultaneously, in time linear in the total number of postings entries.
If the list lengths are x and y, the merge takes O(x+y) operations.
Crucial: postings sorted by docID.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL
128
34
2

--- Slide 9 ---
Intersecting two postings lists (a “merge” algorithm)
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 10 ---
Boolean queries: Exact match
Boolean retrieval model: being able to ask a query that is a Boolean expression:
  Boolean Queries: using AND, OR and NOT to join query terms
Views each document as a set of words
  Is precise: document matches condition or not.
Perhaps the simplest model to build an IR system on.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 11 ---
Phrase queries
Want to be able to answer queries such as “stanford university” – as a phrase
Thus the sentence “I went to university at Stanford” is not a match.
  The concept of phrase queries has proven easily understood by users; one of the few “advanced search” ideas that works.
  Many more queries are implicit phrase queries.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 12 ---
Positional indexes
In the postings, store, for each term the position(s) in which tokens of it appear:
  <term, number of docs containing term;
  doc1: position1, position2 … ;
  doc2: position1, position2 … ;
  etc.>
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 13 ---
Processing a phrase query
Extract inverted index entries for each distinct term: to, be, or, not.
Merge their doc:position lists to enumerate all positions with “to be or not to be”.
  to:
    2:1,17,74,222,551; 4:8,16,190,429,433; 7:13,23,191; ...
  be:
    1:17,19; 4:17,191,291,430,434; 5:14,19,101; ...
Same general method for proximity searches
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 14 ---
Index Compression
Why compression for inverted indexes?
  Dictionary
    Make it small enough to keep in main memory
    Make it so small that you can keep some postings lists in main memory too
  Postings file(s)
    Reduce disk space needed
    Decrease time needed to read postings lists from disk
    Large search engines keep a significant part of the postings in memory.
    Compression lets you keep more in memory
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 15 ---
Dictionary compression
Array of fixed-width entries
  ~400,000 terms; 28 bytes/term = 11.2 MB.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 16 ---
Dictionary compression
Most of the bytes in the Term column are wasted – we allot 20 bytes for 1 letter terms.
  And we still can’t handle supercalifragilisticexpialidocious or hydrochlorofluorocarbons.
Written English averages ~4.5 characters/word.
Ave. dictionary word in English: ~8 characters
  How do we use ~8 characters per dictionary term?
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 17 ---
Dictionary compression
Dictionary-as-a-String
  Store dictionary as a (long) string of characters:
    Pointer to next word shows end of current word
    Hope to save up to 60% of dictionary space.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 18 ---
Dictionary compression
Blocking
  Store pointers to every kth term string.
    Example below: k=4.
  Need to store term lengths (1 extra byte)
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 19 ---
Dictionary compression
Front coding
  Sorted words commonly have long common prefix – store differences only
    (for last k-1 in a block of k)
    8automata8automate9automatic10automation
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 20 ---
Postings compression
The postings file is much larger than the dictionary, factor of at least 10.
Key desideratum: store each posting compactly.
A posting for our purposes is a docID.
  For Reuters (800,000 documents), we would use 32 bits per docID when using 4-byte integers.
  Alternatively, we can use log2 800,000 ≈ 20 bits per docID.
The goal: use a lot less than 20 bits per docID.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 21 ---
Postings compression
We store the list of docs containing a term in increasing order of docID.
  computer: 33,47,154,159,202 …
Consequence: it suffices to store gaps.
  33,14,107,5,43 …
Hope: most gaps can be encoded/stored with far fewer than 20 bits.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 22 ---
Ranked retrieval
Rather than a set of documents satisfying a query expression, in ranked retrieval models, the system returns an ordering over the (top) documents in the collection with respect to a query.
Free text queries: Rather than a query language of operators and expressions, the user’s query is just one or more words in a human language.
In principle, there are two separate choices here, but in practice, ranked retrieval models have normally been associated with free text queries and vice versa.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 23 ---
Scoring as the basis of ranked retrieval
We wish to return in order the documents most likely to be useful to the searcher.
How can we rank-order the documents in the collection with respect to a query?
  Assign a score – say in [0, 1] – to each document
  This score measures how well document and query “match”.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 24 ---
Weight matrix
  Each document is now represented by a real-valued vector of tf-idf weights ∈ R|V|
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 25 ---
Documents as vectors
So we have a |V|-dimensional vector space.
Terms are axes of the space.
Documents are points or vectors in this space.
Very high-dimensional: tens of millions of dimensions when you apply this to a web search engine.
These are very sparse vectors - most entries are zero.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 26 ---
Queries as vectors
Key idea 1: Do the same for queries: represent them as vectors in the space
Key idea 2: Rank documents according to their proximity to the query in this space.
proximity = similarity of vectors
proximity ≈ inverse of distance
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 27 ---
Why distance is a bad idea?
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 28 ---
Use angle instead of distance
Take a document d and append it to itself. Call this document d′. “Semantically” d and d′ have the same content.
The Euclidean distance between the two documents can be quite large.
The angle between the two documents is 0, corresponding to maximal similarity.
Key idea: Rank documents according to angle with query.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 29 ---
From angles to cosines
The following two notions are equivalent.
  Rank documents in decreasing order of the angle between query and document
  Rank documents in increasing order of cosine(query, document)
Cosine is a monotonically decreasing function for the interval [0o, 180o].
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 30 ---
cosine(query, document)
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 31 ---
Computing cosine scores
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 32 ---
Spell correction
Two main Flavors
  Isolated word
    Check each word on its own for misspelling
    Will not catch typos resulting in correctly spelled words
    e.g., from  form
  Context-sensitive
    Look at surrounding words,
    e.g., I flew form Heathrow to Narita.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 33 ---
Isolated word correction
Fundamental premise – there is a lexicon from which the correct spellings come.
Two basic choices for this
  A standard lexicon such as
    Webster’s English Dictionary
    An “industry-specific” lexicon – hand-maintained
  The lexicon of the indexed corpus
    E.g., all words on the web
    All names, acronyms etc.
    (Including the mis-spellings)
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 34 ---
Isolated word correction
Given a lexicon and a character sequence Q, return the words in the lexicon closest to Q.
What’s “closest”?
We’ll study several alternatives
  Edit distance (Levenshtein distance)
  Weighted edit distance
  n-gram overlap
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 35 ---
Edit distance
Given two strings S1 and S2, the minimum number of operations to convert one to the other.
Operations are typically character-level
  Insert, Delete, Replace, (Transposition)
E.g., the edit distance from dof to dog is 1
  From cat to act is 2	   (Just 1 with transpose.)
  from cat to dog is 3.
Generally found by dynamic programming.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 36 ---
Edit distance
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 37 ---
n-gram overlap
Enumerate all the n-grams in the query string as well as in the lexicon.
Use the n-gram index to retrieve all lexicon terms matching any of the query n-grams.
Threshold by number of matching n-grams
  Variants – weight by keyboard layout, etc.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 38 ---
Example with trigrams
Suppose the text is november
  Trigrams are nov, ove, vem, emb, mbe, ber.
The query is december
  Trigrams are dec, ece, cem, emb, mbe, ber.
So 3 trigrams overlap (of 6 in each term)
How can we turn this into a normalized measure of overlap?
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 39 ---
Jaccard coefficient
A commonly-used measure of overlap. Let X and Y be two sets then the J.C. is
Equals 1 when X and Y have the same elements and zero when they are disjoint
X and Y don’t have to be of the same size
Always assigns a number between 0 and 1
  Now threshold to decide if you have a match
  E.g., if J.C. > 0.8, declare a match
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 40 ---
Context-sensitive spell correction
Text: I flew from Heathrow to Narita.
Consider the phrase query “flew form Heathrow”
We’d like to respond - Did you mean “flew from Heathrow”?
because no docs matched the query phrase.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 41 ---
Context-sensitive spell correction
Need surrounding context to catch this.
First idea: retrieve dictionary terms close (in weighted edit distance) to each query term.
Now try all possible resulting phrases with one word “fixed” at a time
  flew from heathrow
  fled form heathrow
  flea form heathrow
  …
Hit-based spelling correction: Suggest the alternative that has lots of hits.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 42 ---
Query expansion
Improving results
  For high recall. e.g., searching for aircraft doesn’t match with plane; nor thermodynamic with heat
Options for improving results…
  Global methods: independent of queries
    Query expansion
      Thesauri
      Automatic thesaurus generation
  Local methods
    Relevance feedback
    Pseudo relevance feedback
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 43 ---
Relevance Feedback
User feedback on relevance of docs in initial set of results.
  User issues a (short, simple) query
  The user marks some results as relevant or non-relevant.
  The system computes a better representation of the information need based on feedback.
  Relevance feedback can go through one or more iterations.
Idea: it may be difficult to formulate a good query when you don’t know the collection well, so iterate.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 44 ---
Key concept: Centroid
The centroid is the center of mass of a set of points.
Definition: Centroid
where C is a set of documents.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 45 ---
Rocchio 1971 Algorithm (SMART)
Used in practice:
  Dr  = set of known relevant doc vectors
  Dnr = set of known irrelevant doc vectors
  qm = modified query vector; q0 = original query vector;α,β,γ: weights (hand-chosen or set empirically)
New query moves toward relevant documents and away from irrelevant documents.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 46 ---
Query Expansion
In relevance feedback, users give additional input (relevant/non-relevant) on documents, which is used to reweight terms in the documents.
In query expansion, users give additional input (good/bad search term) on words or phrases.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 47 ---
Thesaurus-based query expansion
For each term, t, in a query, expand the query with synonyms and related words of t from the thesaurus
  feline → feline cat
May weight added terms less than original query terms.
Generally increases recall.
Widely used in many science/engineering fields.
May significantly decrease precision, particularly with ambiguous terms.
  “interest rate” → “interest rate fascinate evaluate”
There is a high cost of manually producing a thesaurus
  And for updating it for scientific changes
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 48 ---
Automatic Thesaurus Generation
Attempt to generate a thesaurus automatically by analyzing the collection of documents.
Fundamental notion: similarity between two words.
Definition 1: Two words are similar if they co-occur with similar words.
Definition 2: Two words are similar if they occur in a given grammatical relation with the same words.
Co-occurrence based is more robust, grammatical relations are more accurate.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

--- Slide 49 ---
Co-occurrence Thesaurus
Simplest way to compute one is based on term-term similarities in C = AAT where A is term-document matrix.
wi,j = (normalized) weight for (ti ,dj)
For each ti, pick terms with high values in C.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL
